Add Handwriting Recognition article (#5301)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/handwriting-recognition/index.md

---

> title: Handwriting Recognition (WT)

Reviewer: What's "WT"?

Reviewer 2: Working title. @jpmedley, don't bother with the PR quite yet. I'm working with @christianliebel (one of our Google Developer Experts) and will only loop you in once the article is ready for your review. The ETA for the article is end of this week (May 14), so your review would probably only need to begin the week after (May 16).

subhead: Recognize your user's handwriting with ease.
description: |
  A description of the article that will appear in search results.

> 
> # A list of authors. Supports more than one.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

authors:
  - christianliebel
  - thomassteiner

date: 2021-05-10

> # Add an updated date to your post if you edit in the future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

# updated: 2019-11-01

> 
> # Add the scheduled flag if you'd like your post to automatically go live
> # during a future date. Posts will deploy at 7am PST / 15:00 UTC.
> # Example: A post with `date: 2050-01-01`, `scheduled: true`, will go live at
> # 7am PST, January 1st, 2050.
> # If you don't use the scheduled flag then setting a future date has no effect.
> # scheduled: true
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

hero: image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/k1gdvpBMneFVrOC5h4yQ.jpg
alt: A hand draws letters in calligraphic script on a paper.

> 
> # You can provide a custom thumbnail and description for social media cards.
> # Thumbnail images should be 896 x 480.
> # If no social thumbnail is provided then the post will attempt to fallback to
> # the post's thumbnail or hero from above. It will also reuse the alt.
> # social:
> #   google:
> #     title: A title for Google search card.
> #     description: A description for Google search card.
> #     thumbnail: google_thumbnail.jpg
> #     alt: Provide an alt for your thumbnail.
> #   facebook:
> #     title: A title for Facebook card.
> #     description: A description for Facebook card.
> #     thumbnail: facebook_thumbnail.jpg
> #     alt: Provide an alt for your thumbnail.
> #   twitter:
> #     title: A title for Twitter card.
> #     description: A description for Twitter card.
> #     thumbnail: twitter_thumbnail.jpg
> #     alt: Provide an alt for your thumbnail.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

tags:
  - blog # blog is a required tag for the article to show up in the blog.
  - capabilities

> feedback:
> - api

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
origin_trial:
  url: https://developer.chrome.com/origintrials/#/view_trial/🎉TODO_UPDATE🎉
```

# You can provide an optional Stack Overflow tag to be used at the end of the
# post in an "Ask on Stack Overflow" note.
# Find the official list of tags at https://stackoverflow.com/tags.
# stack_overflow_tag: service-worker
---

> (Motivation)
> Modern operating systems often already provide APIs for detecting handwriting…
> The Handwriting Recognition API is a relatively new API…

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## What is the Handwriting Recognition API? {: #what }

The Handwriting Recognition API is a new web platform API that allows TODO.
Modern operating systems often already provide APIs for detecting handwriting…

### Suggested use cases for the API_NAME API {: #use-cases }

Examples of sites that may use this API include:
* TODO.
* TODO.
* TODO.

```

## Current status {: #status }

<div class="w-table-wrapper">

| Step                                         | Status                       |
| -------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------- |
| **1. Create explainer**                      | [Complete][explainer]        |
| 2. Create initial draft of specification     | Not started                  |
| 3. Gather feedback & iterate on design       | [In progress](#feedback)     |
| 4. Origin trial                              | Not started                  |
| 5. Launch                                    | Not started                  |

</div>

## How to use Handwriting Recognition

> ### Enabling via chrome://flags
> 
> The Handwriting Recognition API is not generally available yet. Starting from
> Chrome&nbsp;OS&nbsp;90, you can enable support by using the **Experimental Web Platform Features**
> flag. Navigate to `chrome://flags/#enable-experimental-web-platform-features` to find that setting.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Enabling via chrome://flags

To experiment with the Handwriting Recognition API locally, without an origin trial token, enable the `#experimental-web-platform-features` flag in `chrome://flags`.

{% Aside %}
Note that the API is currently exclusive to Chrome&nbsp;OS devices.
{% endAside %}
```

### Feature detection

Browser support can be detected by checking for the existence of the
`createHandwritingRecognizer()` method on the `navigator` object:

```js
function supportsHandwritingRecognition() {
  return 'createHandwritingRecognizer' in navigator;
}
```

TODO: Alternative: `'HandwritingStroke' in window`

### Core concepts

TODO

* Querying recognizer support
* Creating a recognizer
* Add a drawing (interplay Handwriting recog + Pointer Events)
* Add a stroke
* Add points
* Recognize text
* Finish recognition

## Demo

TODO: Web component

[demo on Glitch](https://handwriting-recognition.glitch.me/)
[source code on Glitch](https://glitch.com/edit/#!/handwriting-recognition)

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

## Security and permissions

The Chromium team has designed and implemented the Handwriting Recognition API using the core principles defined in [Controlling Access to Powerful Web Platform Features][powerful-apis], including user control, transparency, and ergonomics.

### User control

TODO: How does a user enable or disable this API? Will they be prompted for permission before it's enabled? Is it on by default, can they turn it off? 

### Transparency

TODO: Is there any indication that the API is in use? Is there an icon in the address bar, or tab? How does a user know that the site is using the API?

### Permission persistence

TODO: Is the permission persisted between visits? Or when they come back, do they need to give permission again? 
```

> ## Feedback
> 
> The Chromium team wants to hear about your experiences with handwriting recognition.
> 
> TODO: Does it? :)
> 
> ### Tell us about the API design
> 
> Is there something about the API that does not work like you expected? Or are there missing methods
> or properties that you need to implement your idea? Do you have a question or comment on the
> security model? File a spec issue on the corresponding [GitHub repo][github], or add your thoughts
> to an existing issue.
> 
> ### Report a problem with the implementation
> 
> TODO: crbug Component?
> 
> Did you find a bug with Chromium's implementation? Or is the implementation different from the spec?
> File a bug at [new.crbug.com](https://new.crbug.com). Be sure to include as much detail as you can,
> simple instructions for reproducing, and enter `Blink>MediaStream` in the **Components** box.
> [Glitch](https://glitch.com/) works great for sharing quick and easy repros.
> 
> ### Show support for the API
> 
> Are you planning to use handwriting recognition? Your public support helps the Chromium team
> prioritize features and shows other browser vendors how critical it is to support them.
> 
> TODO: Hashtag
> 
> Send a tweet to [@ChromiumDev][cr-dev-twitter] using the hashtag
> [`#InsertableStreams`](https://twitter.com/search?q=%23InsertableStreams&src=recent_search_click&f=live)
> and let us know where and how you are using it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Feedback {: #feedback }

The Chromium team wants to hear about your experiences with the Handwriting Recognition API.

### Tell us about the API design

Is there something about the API that doesn't work like you expected? Or are there missing methods or properties that you need to implement your idea? Have a question or comment on the security model?
File a spec issue on the corresponding [GitHub repo][issues], or add your thoughts to an existing issue.

### Report a problem with the implementation

Did you find a bug with Chromium's implementation? Or is the implementation different from the spec?
File a bug at [new.crbug.com](https://new.crbug.com). Be sure to include as much detail as you can, simple instructions for reproducing, and enter `TODO` in the **Components** box. [Glitch](https://glitch.com/) works great for sharing quick and easy repros.

### Show support for the API

Are you planning to use the Handwriting Recognition API? Your public support helps the Chromium team prioritize features and shows other browser vendors how critical it is to support them.

Share how you plan to use it on the [WICG Discourse thread][wicg-discourse].
Send a tweet to [@ChromiumDev][cr-dev-twitter] using the hashtag [`#HandwritingRecognition`](https://twitter.com/search?q=%23HandwritingRecognition&src=recent_search_click&f=live) and let us know where and how you're using it.
```

## Helpful Links

- [Explainer][explainer]
- [GitHub repo][github]
- [ChromeStatus](https://www.chromestatus.com/features/5263213807534080)

> - [Chromium bug](https://crbug.com/1166910)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Chromium bug](https://crbug.com/1166910)
- [Intent to Prototype][i2p]
```

TODO: CrBug not public yet

## Acknowledgements

This article was reviewed by [reviewer #1](#) and [reviewer #2](#).
Thanks to [external contributor #1](#) and [external contributor #2](#) for
their work on TODO.
Hero image by [Samir Bouaked](https://unsplash.com/@sbouaked) on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/photos/MFvflDBZdyM).

[explainer]: https://github.com/WICG/handwriting-recognition/blob/main/explainer.md
[github]: https://github.com/WICG/handwriting-recognition

> [cr-dev-twitter]: https://twitter.com/ChromiumDev

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[cr-dev-twitter]: https://twitter.com/ChromiumDev
[powerful-apis]: https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromium/src/+/lkgr/docs/security/permissions-for-powerful-web-platform-features.md
```

method on the navigator object:

```js
if ('createHandwritingRecognizer' in navigator) {
  // 🎉 The Handwriting Recognition API is supported!
}
```

### Core concepts

<!-- 🎉TODO🎉: Image showing the core entities -->

The Handwriting Recognition API converts handwritten input into text, regardless of the input method
(mouse, touch, pen). The API has four main entities:

1. A _point_ represents where the pointer was at a particular time.
2. A _stroke_ consists of one or more points. The recording of a stroke starts when the user puts
   the pointer down (i.e., clicks the primary mouse button, or touches the screen with their pen or
   finger) and ends when they raise the pointer back up.
3. A _drawing_ consists of one or more strokes. The actual recognition takes place at this level.
4. The _recognizer_ is configured with the expected input language. It is used to create an instance
   of a drawing with the recognizer configuration applied.

#### Creating a recognizer

To recognize text from handwritten input, you need to obtain an instance of a
`HandwritingRecognizer` by calling the `createHandwritingRecognizer()` method on the `navigator`

> object, and passing constraints to it. They are used to determine the handwriting recognition model

Author: As the actual recognition model is never exposed to the developer, I wouldn't describe it in detail here. We could get rid of the term "model" by saying something like: "Constraints configure the recognizer."

that should be used. Currently, you can specify a list of languages in order of preference. In the
following example, the developer would prefer to recognize texts in English and fall back to German
as spoken in Germany when available.

```js
const recognizer = await navigator.createHandwritingRecognizer({

>   languages: ['en', 'de-DE'],

Reviewer 3: I think we should omit 'de-DE'.

At the moment, Chrome OS recognizers only support one language (providing multiple languages will cause an error); and the supported language is 'en' (English)

Reviewer: The text describes how to deal with multiple languages. The text would need to be rewritten as well. 

How soon will this be enabled? It would be better to add a disclaimer that this isn't enabled yet, then to remove the section and add it back later. Removing the disclaimer will take all of about five minutes. Re-adding text would take a whole review process.

Reviewer 3: @yuhonglin better knows about the timeline. But probably not in near future.

Reviewer 4: Yeah, multi-language support is non-trivial and may need one-quarter to implement. I will try make it as an OKR for next quarter.

Author: I removed the 'de-DE' sample and added a note about the gesture support in the aside box.

- gain access to the segmentation result, i.e., the recognized characters, including the points and
  strokes that make them up

```js
const { languages, alternatives, segmentationResults } =
  await navigator.queryHandwritingRecognizerSupport({
    languages: ['en', 'de-DE'],
    alternatives: true,
    segmentationResult: true,
  });

console.log(languages); // true or false
console.log(alternatives); // true or false
console.log(segmentationResult); // true or false
```

The method returns a promise resolving to a result object. If the browser supports the feature
specified by the developer, its value will be set to `true`. Otherwise, it will be set to `false`.
You can use this information to enable or disable certain features within your application, or to
adjust your query and send a new one.

{% Aside %} Due to fingerprinting concerns, you cannot request a list of supported features, such as
particular languages, and the browser may ask for user permission or reject your request entirely if
you send too many feature queries. {% endAside %}

#### Start a drawing

Within your application, you should offer an input area where the user makes their handwritten

> entries. It makes sense to implement this with the help of a

Author: Theoretically yes, you could also implement it with SVG, but canvas makes the most sense.

> entries. It makes sense to implement this with the help of a

Reviewer: Is it getting too far into the weeks to say why it makes sense?

{% Aside %} If necessary, you can also use the drawing's `getStrokes()` method to list all strokes,
and the `removeStroke()` method to remove a particular one from the drawing. {% endAside %}

Next, it's time for recognizing the user's input by calling the `getPrediction()` method on the
drawing. Recognition usually only takes less than a few hundred milliseconds, so you can repeatedly
run predictions if needed. The following example runs a new prediction after each completed stroke.

```js
canvas.addEventListener('pointerup', async (event) => {
  drawing.addStroke(activeStroke.stroke);
  activeStroke = null;

  const [mostConfidentPrediction, ...lessConfidentAlternatives] = await drawing.getPrediction();
  if (mostConfidentPrediction) {
    console.log(mostConfidentPrediction.text);
  }
  lessConfidentAlternatives?.forEach((alternative) => console.log(alternative.text));
});
```

This method returns a promise which resolves to an array of predictions ordered by their confidence.
The number of elements depends on the value you passed to the `alternatives` hint. You could use
this array to present the user with a choice of possible matches, and have them select an option.

> Alternatively, you can simply go with the most confident prediction, which is what I do in the

Author: Confidence is determined by the algorithm rather than by the developer. Would "most likely prediction" work?

> Alternatively, you can simply go with the most confident prediction, which is what I do in the

Reviewer: Yes.

#### Detailed insights with segmentation results

<!-- 🎉TODO🎉: Image -->

If supported by the target platform, the prediction object can also contain a segmentation result.
This is an array containing all recognized handwriting segment, a combination of the recognized
user-identifiable character (`grapheme`) along with its position in the recognized text
(`beginIndex`, `endIndex`), and the strokes and points that created it. You could use this
information to track down the recognized graphemes on the canvas again.

```js
if (mostLikelyPrediction.segmentationResult) {
  mostLikelyPrediction.segmentationResult.forEach(
    ({ grapheme, beginIndex, endIndex, drawingSegments }) => {
      console.log(grapheme, beginIndex, endIndex);
      drawingSegments.forEach(({ strokeIndex, beginPointIndex, endPointIndex }) => {
        console.log(strokeIndex, beginPointIndex, endPointIndex);
      });
    },
  );
}
```

#### Complete recognition

After the recognition has completed, you can free resources by calling the `clear()` method on the
`HandwritingDrawing`, and the `finish()` method on the `HandwritingRecognizer`:

```js
drawing.clear();
recognizer.finish();
```

## Demo

> The web component `<handwriting-textarea>` implements a

Author: Added a link.

[progressively enhanced](/progressively-enhance-your-pwa/), editing control capable of handwriting
recognition. By clicking the button in the lower right corner of the editing control, you activate
the drawing mode. When you complete the drawing, the web component will automatically start the
recognition and add the recognized text back to the editing control. If the Handwriting Recognition
API is not supported at all, or the platform doesn't support the requested features, the edit button
will be hidden, but the basic editing control remains usable as a `<textarea>`.

The web component offers properties and attributes to define the recognition behavior from the
outside, including `languages` and `recognitiontype`:

```html
<handwriting-textarea languages="en,de-DE" recognitiontype="text"></handwriting-textarea>
```

> <!-- 🎉TODO🎉: How to get text in or out? -->

Author: Added instructions.

You can try the component using [this demo on Glitch](https://handwriting-recognition.glitch.me/).
Also be sure to have a look at the
[source code](https://glitch.com/edit/#!/handwriting-recognition).

> <!-- 🎉TODO🎉: Glitch takes ages to start… -->

Reviewer 3: I suspect this is because glitch needs to build the demo (because it's not vanilla JS) before serving it.

I had a demo that's 100% vanilla JS, which loads immediately: https://hwr-playground.glitch.me/

> <!-- 🎉TODO🎉: Glitch takes ages to start… -->

Author: Added a static build to Glitch now, and point to GitHub for the source code.

drawing. Recognition usually takes less than a few hundred milliseconds, so you can repeatedly
run predictions if needed. The following example runs a new prediction after each completed stroke.

```js
canvas.addEventListener('pointerup', async (event) => {
  drawing.addStroke(activeStroke.stroke);
  activeStroke = null;

  const [mostConfidentPrediction, ...lessConfidentAlternatives] = await drawing.getPrediction();
  if (mostConfidentPrediction) {
    console.log(mostConfidentPrediction.text);
  }
  lessConfidentAlternatives?.forEach((alternative) => console.log(alternative.text));
});
```

This method returns a promise which resolves with an array of predictions ordered by their confidence.
The number of elements depends on the value you passed to the `alternatives` hint. You could use
this array to present the user with a choice of possible matches, and have them select an option.
Alternatively, you can simply go with the most confident prediction, which is what I do in the
example.

The prediction object contains the recognized text and an optional segmentation result,
which I will discuss in the following section.

#### Detailed insights with segmentation results

> <!-- 🎉TODO🎉: Image -->

Reviewer: When you get the images, make sure you don't start you sections with them.

---
title: Recognize your users' handwriting
subhead:

>   The Handwriting Recognition API allows you to recognize text from handwritten input in real time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The Handwriting Recognition API allows you to recognize text from handwritten input as it happens.
```

Real time may be overselling it slightly.

description: |

>   The Handwriting Recognition API allows web applications to make use of advanced handwriting recognition services to recognize text from hand drawings in real time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The Handwriting Recognition API allows web applications to make use of advanced handwriting recognition services to recognize text from handwritten input in real time.
```

authors:
  - christianliebel
  - thomassteiner

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

date: 2021-05-14
# updated: 2021-05-14
hero: image/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/k1gdvpBMneFVrOC5h4yQ.jpg
alt: A hand draws letters in calligraphic script on a paper.
tags:
  - blog # blog is a required tag for the article to show up in the blog.
  - capabilities

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

origin_trial:
  url: https://developer.chrome.com/origintrials/#/view_trial/🎉TODO_UPDATE🎉
---

{% Aside %} The Handwriting Recognition API is part of the [capabilities project](/fugu-status/) and
is currently in development. This post will be updated as the implementation progresses.
{% endAside %}

## What is the Handwriting Recognition API? {: #what }

> > TODO: GIF of demo

Reviewer 2: Note that we have a `{% Video %}`. Just pass me the `.mp4`, I'll take care of uploading.

> The Handwriting Recognition API is a new web platform API that allows you to convert handwritten

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Handwriting Recognition API is a web platform API proposal that allows you to convert handwritten
```

Everything is "new" at the beginning. Not standardized, so "proposal".

drawings (ink) from your users into text. Some operating systems have long included such APIs,
and with this new capability, your web apps can finally leverage the same powerful functionality.
The conversion takes place directly on the user's device, works even in offline mode, all without
adding any third-party libraries or services.

> This API implements a so-called "on-line" or real-time recognition. This means that the handwritten

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This API implements a so-called "on-line" or near real-time recognition. This means that the handwritten
```

input is recognized while the user is drawing it, by capturing and analyzing the single strokes. In
contrast to "off-line" procedures such as Optical Character Recognition (OCR), where only the end

> product is known, on-line algorithms can provide a higher level of accuracy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
product is known, on-line algorithms can provide a higher level of accuracy
due to additional signals like the temporal sequence and pressure of individual ink strokes.
```

### Suggested use cases for the Handwriting Recognition API {: #use-cases }

Examples of sites that may use this API include:

- Note-taking applications where users want to capture handwritten notes and have them translated
  into text.

> - Forms applications where users use pen or finger input due to time constraints.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Forms applications where users can use pen or finger input due to time constraints.
```

> - Games that require filling in letters, such as crosswords or Hangman.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Games that require filling in letters, such as crosswords, sudoku or hangman.
```

Author: ```suggestion
- Games that require filling in letters or numbers, such as crosswords, hangman, or sudoku.
```

So that letter/number examples are in order?

## Current status {: #status }

<div class="w-table-wrapper">

| Step                                     | Status                   |
| ---------------------------------------- | ------------------------ |
| 1. Create explainer                      | [Complete][explainer]    |
| 2. Create initial draft of specification | Not started              |
| 3. Gather feedback & iterate on design   | [In progress](#feedback) |
| 4. Origin trial                          | Not started              |
| 5. Launch                                | Not started              |

</div>

> ## How to use Handwriting Recognition {: #use }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## How to use the Handwriting Recognition API {: #use }
```

> ### Enabling via chrome://flags

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Enabling via about://flags
```

See https://crbug.com/1207913

To experiment with the Handwriting Recognition API locally, without an origin trial token, enable

> the `#experimental-web-platform-features` flag in `chrome://flags`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the `#experimental-web-platform-features` flag in `about://flags`.
```

> {% Aside %} Note that the API is currently exclusive to Chrome&nbsp;OS devices. {% endAside %}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{% Aside 'caution' %} Note that the API is currently exclusive to Chrome&nbsp;OS devices. {% endAside %}
```

> REVIEW: Add the version? Probably M90+

> > REVIEW: There is no Origin Trial yet.

Author: @tomayac What about those?

Reviewer 2: The link will come… Watch the bug.

Reviewer 2: Or we launch the article with just a Dev Trial.

Author: Ah, I didn't know OT is basically around the corner (didn't have access to the issue before). I watch the bug now.

Reviewer 2: See https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/d/msgid/blink-dev/CANFkJJmGJVmkrO1xAeDNc9i9%2Bp5z%2BacpRPDAD8doxYnFGN37%3Dg%40mail.gmail.com

_"Due to technical reasons, we plan to run an origin trial in M91 on a limited set of devices that can support it._

_We plan to expand the origin trial coverage to all Chrome OS devices in M92, and run a Chrome-OS-wide origin trial from M92 to M94."_

--
Unrelated PS: Other links worth adding (if you don't have them yet):

- https://github.com/mozilla/standards-positions/issues/507
- https://lists.webkit.org/pipermail/webkit-dev/2021-March/031762.html
- https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/d/msgid/blink-dev/CANFkJJmpn2FtAXcWgYGvz04_DVBkkkiXXHvSM7jg5haH3ZvRJQ%40mail.gmail.com

### Feature detection

Browser support can be detected by checking for the existence of the `createHandwritingRecognizer()`
method on the navigator object:

```js

> function supportsHandwritingRecognition() {
>   return 'createHandwritingRecognizer' in navigator;
> }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
if ('createHandwritingRecognizer' in navigator) {
  // 🎉 The Handwriting Recognition API is supported!
}
```

```

### Core concepts

> TODO: Image showing the core entities

The Handwriting Recognition API converts handwritten input into text, regardless of the input
method (mouse, touch, pen). The API has four main entities:

> 1. A _point_ represents where (i.e., X and Y coordinates) the pointer was at a particular time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. A _point_ represents where the pointer was at a particular time (i.e., X and Y coordinates).
```

Author: ```suggestion
1. A _point_ represents where the pointer was at a particular time.
```

Time + X, Y coordinates doesn't make too much sense, maybe drop the entire coordinates thing?

2. A _stroke_ consists of one or more points. The recording of a stroke starts when the user puts
   the pointer down (i.e., clicks the primary mouse button, or touches the screen with their pen or
   finger) and ends when they raise the pointer back up.

> 3. A _drawing_ consists of one or more strokes. The actual recognition takes place on this level.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. A _drawing_ consists of one or more strokes. The actual recognition takes place at this level.
```

4. The _recognizer_ is configured with the expected input language. It is used to create an instance of a drawing
   with the recognizer configuration applied.

#### Creating a recognizer

To recognize text from handwritten input, you need to obtain an instance of a

> `HandwritingRecognizer` by calling the `createHandwritingRecognizer()` method on the navigator

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`HandwritingRecognizer` by calling the `createHandwritingRecognizer()` method on the `navigator`
```

object, and passing constraints to it. They are used to determine the handwriting recognition model
that should be used. Currently, you can specify a list of languages in order of preference. In the
following example, the developer would prefer to recognize texts in English and fall back to German

> when available.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
as spoken in Germany when available.
```

Reviewer 2: (Will this in turn fall back to "de"?)

Author: As per the proposal, [it should](https://github.com/WICG/handwriting-recognition/blob/main/explainer.md#language-handling). However, it doesn't seem to be implemented right now (`en` works, but `en-GB` won't).

```js
const recognizer = await navigator.createHandwritingRecognizer({
  languages: ['en', 'de-DE'],
});
```

{% Aside 'caution' %} The current implementation on Chrome&nbsp;OS only supports recognizing texts
in English (`en`). {% endAside %}

> REVIEW: ⬆️ I'm not sure about that, at least `de` and `en-US` don't seem to work.

The method returns a promise resolving to an instance of a `HandwritingRecognizer` in case the browser
can fulfill your request. Otherwise, it will reject the promise with an error, and handwriting
recognition will not be available. For this reason, you may want to query the recognizer's support
for particular recognition features first.

#### Querying recognizer support

> By calling the `queryHandwritingRecognizerSupport()` method on the navigator object, you can check

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By calling the `queryHandwritingRecognizerSupport()` method on the `navigator` object, you can check
```

if the target platform supports the handwriting recognition features you intend to use. In the

> following example, the developer

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
following example, the developer…
```

- wants to detect texts in English and German

> - get alternative, less likely predictions when available and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- get alternative, less likely predictions when available
```

- gain access to the segmentation result, i.e., the recognized characters, including the
  points and strokes that make them up

```js

> const support = await navigator.queryHandwritingRecognizerSupport({
>   languages: ['en', 'de-DE'],
>   alternatives: true,
>   segmentationResult: true,
> });
> 
> console.log(support.languages); // true or false
> console.log(support.alternatives); // true or false
> console.log(support.segmentationResult); // true or false

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
const { languages, alternatives, segmentationResults } = await navigator.queryHandwritingRecognizerSupport({
  languages: ['en', 'de-DE'],
  alternatives: true,
  segmentationResult: true,
});

console.log(languages); // true or false
console.log(alternatives); // true or false
console.log(segmentationResult); // true or false
```

Reviewer 2: Let prettier do the indenting :-)

> API perspective, but unless there are such new features, I would not include that here.

The method returns a promise resolving to a result object. If the browser supports the feature
specified by the developer, its value will be set to `true`. Otherwise, it will be set to `false`.
You can use this information to enable or disable certain features within your application, or to
adjust your query and send a new one.

{% Aside %} Due to fingerprinting concerns, you cannot request a list of
supported features, such as particular languages, and the browser may ask for user permission or reject
your request entirely if you send too many feature queries. {% endAside %}

#### Start a drawing

Within your application, you should offer an input area where the user makes their handwritten
entries. It makes sense to implement this with the help of a
[canvas object](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Canvas_API/Tutorial). The exact
implementation of this part is out of scope for this article, but you may refer to the [demo](#demo)
to see how it can be done.

To start a new drawing, call the `startDrawing()` method on the recognizer. This method takes an

> object containing different hints to finetune the recognition algorithm. All hints are optional:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
object containing different hints to fine-tune the recognition algorithm. All hints are optional:
```

> - The kind of text being entered: text, email addresses, numbers or an individual character

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The kind of text being entered: text, email addresses, numbers, or an individual character
```

  (`recognitionType`)
- The type of input device: mouse, touch or pen input (`inputType`)
- The preceding text (`textContext`)
- The number of less-likely alternative predictions that should be returned (`alternatives`)
- A list of user-identifiable characters ("graphemes") the user will most likely enter
  (`graphemeSet`)

The Handwriting Recognition API plays well together with
[Pointer Events](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Pointer_events) which provide an
abstract interface to consume input from any pointing device. The pointer event arguments contain

> the type of pointer being used. Thus, you can use pointer events to determine the input type

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the type of pointer being used. This means you can use pointer events to determine the input type
```

new point to it.

```js
canvas.addEventListener('pointermove', (event) => {
  if (activeStroke) {
    addPoint(event);
  }
});
```

#### Recognize text

When the user lifts the pointer again, you can add the stroke to your drawing by calling its
`addStroke()` method. The following example also resets the `activeStroke`, so the `pointermove`
handler will not add points to the completed stroke.

{% Aside %} If necessary, you can also use the drawing's `getStrokes()` method to list all strokes,
and the `removeStroke()` method to remove a particular one from the drawing. {% endAside %}

Next, it's time for recognizing the user's input by calling the `getPrediction()` method on the
drawing. Recognition usually only takes less than a few hundred milliseconds, so you can repeatedly run predictions
if needed. The following example runs a new prediction after each completed stroke.

```js
canvas.addEventListener('pointerup', async (event) => {
  drawing.addStroke(activeStroke.stroke);
  activeStroke = null;

  const [mostConfidentPrediction, ...lessConfidentAlternatives] = await drawing.getPrediction();
  if (mostConfidentPrediction) {

>     console.log(mostConfidentPrediction.text);

Reviewer 2: Anything else in there apart from `.text`?

Reviewer 2: Should probably also log the `lessConfidentAlternatives`.

Author: Yes, the `segmentationResult` that is discussed in the following section.

Author: ```js
  if (mostConfidentPrediction) {
    console.log(mostConfidentPrediction.text);
  }
  lessConfidentAlternatives?.forEach(alternative => console.log(alternative.text));
```

Author: Done. Is it okay to only mention `text` here?

  }
});
```

This method returns a promise which resolves to an array of predictions ordered by their confidence.
The number of elements depends on the value you passed to the `alternatives` hint. You
could use this array to present the user with a choice of possible matches, and have them select an
option. Alternatively, you can simply go with the most confident prediction,

> which is what the developer does in the example. On the prediction object, you will find the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which is what I do in the example. On the prediction object, you will find the
```

recognized text.

#### Detailed insights with segmentation results

> TODO: Image

If supported by the target platform, the prediction object can also contain a segmentation result.

> This is an array containing all recognized user-identifiable characters (`grapheme`) along

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is an array containing all recognized user-identifiable characters (`grapheme` objects) along
```

Author: Technically, the elements of this array are `HandwritingSegment`s that contain a `grapheme` property. Maybe I should be more precise here.

Author: Now updated.

with their position in the recognized text (`beginIndex`, `endIndex`), and the strokes and points
that created it. You could use this information to track down the recognized graphemes on the canvas
again.

```js
if (mostLikelyPrediction.segmentationResult) {
  mostLikelyPrediction.segmentationResult.forEach(
    ({ grapheme, beginIndex, endIndex, drawingSegments }) => {
      console.log(grapheme, beginIndex, endIndex);
      drawingSegments.forEach(({ strokeIndex, beginPointIndex, endPointIndex }) => {
        console.log(strokeIndex, beginPointIndex, endPointIndex);
      });
    },
  );
}
```

#### Complete recognition

After the recognition has completed, you can free resources by calling the `clear()` method on the
`HandwritingDrawing`, and the `finish()` method on the `HandwritingRecognizer`:

```js
drawing.clear();
recognizer.finish();
```

## Demo

The web component `<handwriting-textarea>` implements a [progressively enhanced](/progressively-enhance-your-pwa/),

> handwriting recognition-enabled textarea. By clicking the button in the lower right corner of the textarea,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`textarea` capable of handwriting recognition. By clicking the button in the lower right corner of the `textarea`,
```

you activate the drawing mode. When you complete the drawing, the web component will automatically start

> recognition and add the recognized text back to the textarea. If the Handwriting Recognition API is not

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the recognition and add the recognized text back to the editing control. If the Handwriting Recognition API is not
```

supported at all, or the platform doesn't support the requested features, the edit button will be hidden, but

> the basic textarea remains usable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the basic editing controls remains usable as a `<textarea>`.
```

> The web component offers properties and attributes to define the recognition behaviour from the outside, including

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The web component offers properties and attributes to define the recognition behavior from the outside, including
```

`languages` and `recognitiontype`:

```html
<handwriting-textarea languages="en,de-DE" recognitiontype="text"></handwriting-textarea>
```

> TODO: How to get text in or out?

You can try the component using [this demo on Glitch](https://handwriting-recognition.glitch.me/).

> You can also have a look at the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Also be sure to have a look at the
```

> [source code on Glitch](https://glitch.com/edit/#!/handwriting-recognition).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[source code](https://glitch.com/edit/#!/handwriting-recognition).
```

> TODO: Glitch takes ages to start…

## Security and permissions

The Chromium team has designed and implemented the Handwriting Recognition API using the core
principles defined in [Controlling Access to Powerful Web Platform Features][powerful-apis],
including user control, transparency, and ergonomics.

### User control

> The Handwriting Recognition API is currently implemented behind a flag. If the flag is enabled, the
> API is available by default and can't be turned off by the user. It is only available for websites

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Handwriting Recognition API can't be turned off by the user. It is only available for websites
```

delivered via HTTPS.

### Transparency

> At the time of this writing, there is no indication that the API is in active use.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is no indication if handwriting recognition is active, but the browser has countermeasures
like prompts implemented to detect if the API is being abused for fingerprinting purposes.
```

model? File a spec issue on the corresponding [GitHub repo][issues], or add your thoughts to an
existing issue.

### Report a problem with the implementation

Did you find a bug with Chromium's implementation? Or is the implementation different from the spec?
File a bug at [new.crbug.com](https://new.crbug.com). Be sure to include as much detail as you can,
simple instructions for reproducing, and enter `Blink>Handwriting` in the **Components** box.
[Glitch](https://glitch.com/) works great for sharing quick and easy repros.

### Show support for the API

Are you planning to use the Handwriting Recognition API? Your public support helps the Chromium team
prioritize features and shows other browser vendors how critical it is to support them.

Share how you plan to use it on the [WICG Discourse thread][wicg-discourse]. Send a tweet to
[@ChromiumDev][cr-dev-twitter] using the hashtag
[`#HandwritingRecognition`](https://twitter.com/search?q=%23HandwritingRecognition&src=recent_search_click&f=live)
and let us know where and how you're using it.

## Helpful Links

- [Explainer][explainer]
- [GitHub repo][github]
- [ChromeStatus](https://www.chromestatus.com/features/5263213807534080)

> - [Chromium bug](https://crbug.com/1166910)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Chromium bug](https://crbug.com/1207667)
```

- [TAG review](https://github.com/w3ctag/design-reviews/issues/591)
- [Intent to Prototype][i2p]

> > TODO: CrBug not public yet
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

They have created a public copy: https://crbug.com/1207667.

## Acknowledgements

> This article was reviewed by [Joe Medley]. Thanks to [Thinktecture](https://www.thinktecture.com)
> for providing the demo implementation. Hero image by [Samir Bouaked](https://unsplash.com/@sbouaked)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This article was reviewed by [Joe Medley]. Hero image by [Samir Bouaked](https://unsplash.com/@sbouaked)
```

I fear this won't work. No sponsorship is allowed.

Reviewer 2: Alternative proposal: Add the company more prominently to your bio. Right now you have http://localhost:8080/authors/christianliebel/.
